So what we usually do as was I was asking you about the user flow.
The user flow is sometimes more with a keyboard, right?
Exceptional case like me or with multiple sclerosis, we want to use more of our mouse.
Even the small mouses on our keypad, on the laptop, it's not very good for us.
You know, moving our hand like this, we slide it.
We don't put it like this.
It's very difficult because we don't have this kind of a strength to put like this.
So we slide or we just you know sometimes now that my it's a progression in the disability I just sometimes do like this to reach out
right so these are very simple things which even children want to do it because the development of the neuromotor functions are not so good, so they would want also want to crawl and then breach out.
So let's understand that difficulty and then we move forward.
What we do is we open the website first, that's the first thing.
Use tap key for navigation.
Most of the people with locomotive disabilities, people with visual impairment also do those.
Tap key for navigation and it is the most simplest part of it.
But for me, as I'm saying multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, Parkinson, even the going to the tap key and lifting the hand becomes difficult.
That's why we use a lot of mouse.
Focus not on what is there as visible.
Can't do that.
Right?
Keyboard trap in menu form, very difficult to use and cannot submit form.
This is the last thing that we have to do.
We cannot do this.
Sometimes I struggle a lot.
If I take my personal example
I cannot so when I cannot the outcome is drop out go to some other website which is more accessible so you lose a crucial customer.
At the end of the day, it is a commercial marketing sense.
If I'm not able to use your website, if I'm not able to do the marketing, you are losing on a customer.
And the insight is interface is not operable.
Remember, we are like you.
There's also a word of mouth.
I tell my friend Radhika, don't go to this X website, it doesn't work.
Stop it.
She will go to another ten people saying don't do that.
Those ten people multiplies into hundreds and then thousands.
What happened?
It's just not one customer.
It's a thousand customers at the end of the day you lose and when you lose your customer you lose business.
Am I right?
So I'm just going to show you a
you know
a video by one of my colleague who is a web designer.
I'll show what she has done at the end of the day.
Let's hear what she says.
Hello, my name is Dr.
Amakhival
and I am a disability rights advocate and the co-founder of Asia Pacific Network for Accessibility A.
For the past 14 years, I have worked to shift the world from seeing disability as a problem to be fixed to seeing it as a barrier to be removed.
As a person with locomotive disability myself, I know that the internet is more than just a tool.
It is my window to the world.
It is where we work, we learn and lead.
But many websites are built with the physical assumption that it is simply not true for everyone.
The assumption that every user can use a mouse with high speed procedure.
When a website is designed mouse only, it's like a building with only stairs.
I can see the information inside but I'm physically locked out of accessing it.
So what does a digital ram actually look like for those of us with locomotive disabilities?
First it is about keyboard navigability.
Many of us navigating using the tab key, voice commands, or specialized switches.
If your website does not have a clear focus indicator, that visible box that shows where the cursor is.
We are essentially navigating in the Dow.
Second, consider target size.
If a button is tiny, it requires pixel perfect precision.
For someone with limited hand dexterity or travers, trying to click a small X on a pop up isn't just a nuisance, it is a barrier to autonomy.
Third, we must address time.
If a form times out after two minutes, it discriminates against those who may take longer time to die or navigate.
We need the ability to set our own pace.
In my work, I often talk about moving from independence to interdependence.
This means realizing that our society is at its best when we design for everyone's needs.
From the start.
Accessibility is not just about technical checklist, it is a matter of social justice.
When a website is accessible, I don't have to ask for help to pay a bill or book an appointment.
That agency is fundamental to our dignity.
Remember, a digital world that is easier for me to navigate is also easier for persons with temporary injury, a parent with a child in their arms, or an elderly user.
My disability might limit my physical movement, but your design should never limit my digital life.
Let's build a web that is as radiant, as inclusive as the people who use it.
Thank you.
So I think we confused you.
Abha says she would love to use the
keyboard and I say I would love to use the mouse.
You are confused, and my job is done.
My job was to confuse you because you need to understand that it's not one size fits all.
Right?
Universal design doesn't mean one design for all.
Your website should have such a component that every user, irrespective of disability or any quote unquote ability, which you call ableism, able-bodied.
Anyone can use it.
So not designing for the you know the most ableist, but designing for the most vulnerable person with severe disability, multiple disabilities.
So the point of confusion is not about using a mouse or a keyboard, the point of adaptation is putting everything together that anyone can use it.
Alright?
So with this, I end up here and I hand it over to my next colleague uh Radika to take over, come with little more technical details and talk about what are the requirements as per the law and what best you can do within the given situation so that you don't have to be penalized
and be at a wrong situation.
Remember when I use the word paralyzed, don't do it for the dog.
As I said in the beginning, do it for yourself.
Yes, please.
I just wanted to go back upon what we touched a few seconds ago.
You mentioned tab key or the preference of keyboard versus the mouse.
What uh considering websites that you all use, websites are also mobile first these days, so what would be the alternate option for a tankey on a mobile phone is what I was wondering.
Yeah.
So I think um Radhika and then Guru is coming with all these options what you are asking because I don't want to repeat it again and again for the sake of time and interest, so let these things come up just in case we fail to answer your question.
Then please do remember to take it up again at the end of it.
We have a QA session also.
But I'm sure these things are being covered.
What do happens on the tab?
What happens in the screen reading software, what happens on a mobile phone and beyond that.
That's just the technology part of it.
Okay, good to go.
Alright, so over to you uh Radika if you just have the keys.
I just put it on just the
thing, you go ahead and go ahead.
Uh-huh, I'll spend a good one.
Do you think it's all please?
Hello, yeah.
I think you can take the bottom and save your
Hello?
Yeah, can you hear me?
Yeah.
Okay.
So very good morning once again.
And uh so today we are going to discuss about digital accessibility complaints.
Actually, I got to know that we have designers and also developers.
Okay.
So I will just start again my introduction in a different way.
Like I am Radhika.
I'm a tall.
And wearing a black sari
and addressing you near the stage.
Okay?
Is there any difference?
Why I just did just imagine you're all developer, you're all creators.
Okay, let's visualize one thing that we have a conference hall here, and there are different kinds of people seated here.
Okay, so I addressed considering that there is a person who are visually impaired and they are actually pursuing me, like who is addressing the stage.
Okay, so that is what I try to do.
And say if there is a person with hearing impaired person, okay, he is sitting here and he it is not audible.
So instead, I have a sign interpreter next to me and he is actually translating he, or she translating my speech in a sign language, and he's able to understand what I am explaining.
Okay?
And again, visualize there is a person who are with um sayy
okay, again hearing a pair person, but there is a screen where my speech is actually translated in a text form.
Okay?
He's able to read it.
And Vishware is again there is a person
with um intellectual disability.
Okay, if I'm just talking to them, addressing them only by speech, they may not understand.
So I may use some graphics, I may use some different kinds of simple
pictures which actually make them to understand better.
So, in this physical environment, if you see, we are using different means just to convey one message but in a different way, two different people.
Okay.
Same, we are going to address it even in the digital accessibility.
Okay, so that's that's what we are going to address.
So uh before I take it forward, uh what I'm going to do is uh basically I wanted to uh thank Bajaj Finance because to um you know bringing this forum here at least to address and spread this awareness.
We are in a mission of digital accessibility, as Dr.
Anjali Agirwal Bam already addressed, and she is very instrumental in bringing accessibility in the built environment, and also now we are leading uh with respect to digital accessibility as well.
And so it is very important that how do we achieve it?
It's a long process, but at least we are here addressing this issue and trying to see how we can actually move forward.
Okay.
So uh for any kind of subject if you wanted to understand better, there is four W's and one H, right?
That is, can you tell me what is that four W's and one honey
what, where, when, why and how.
Okay, so I've just addressed this presentation in such a way so that it's very easy so that you can detail.
Right?
So, first is what is accessibility.
So, understanding digital accessibility before actually, yeah, before even getting into digital accessibility, why I'm here and actually addressing this issue to you.
So, I started my career as a tester only.
I being an architect, I worked with different tools, I always had a uh interaction between a developer and a uh you know uh user.
Basically, I did an interface, like I am an intermediator, bridging the gap between a user and a tester.
Okay, so gathering information whatever tool they you develop I go through that and then I'll fill that gaps and then I'll explain them to the developer.
And so for like I work with different tools starting from designing the tool and then developing it, taking it to the client and again coming back to tell them that these are the feedbacks which I have received from the user.
Try to develop it further.
So we released certain tools like 1.0, 2.0.
So it really helped me to get into this niche basically.
And uh so now I've drawn Samathyam and I'm really helping ma'am as a technical head.
So again, here also I'm reaching a gap because I interact with persons with disabilities trying to understand how efficiently the websites and apps are developed and I convey that message in such a way the developer and the designers can understand.
Okay, so we create such reports which is very explanatory so that they can understand and then they fill up the gaps.
So coming to the point, what is uh accessibility?
Understanding digital accessibility.
So it is the practice of designing and developing digital products such as websites, apps, even documents, whatever you upload in the website, that are usable by everyone, including people with disabilities.
Recently there was an uh uh demand from one of the bank, okay.
I don't want to mention the name.
So they came up like even the bank statements should be accessible for the people.
Okay, so in what way we can make it accessible.
So there are certain tools which are available where we can assess it and then we can tell them like these are the uh errors or you know violations which is happening and how they can improve it.
Okay.
And it's about equal access and equal opportunity in the digital ream.
Think of it removing the barriers just like ramps in the physical world.
You all know understand what is uh ramps, right?
I'm just connecting with you with the physical accessibility with the digital.
So, ramp is again a bridging the gap between there is a person who is like you can see ma'am, like if she wants to get into a uh level difference, you know, platform.
So ramp actually helps, right?
So same way we need to have more and more bridging tools in our own website and whatever tools we develop so that diverse people, irrespective of whatever disabilities they have, can access.
Right?
So it is not just about complaints, but it leads to better user experience for all.
So this is already addressed from the beginning.
I gave you an example also when we are addressing so now if you see as a user there is three use which we concentrate.
In those days like 20 years ago when I am developing a website or you know create and trying to target as a user, I had only one word in mind that is user friendly, which all are aware.
Okay.
But now this U is also expanded to two other things: like you have to make it user-centric and you have to make it universal accessible, also.
Okay, so now the spectrum as a user is wider.
It's very big.
It's vast.
And hundred percent accessibility can you bring if you ask me?
No.
Kosish Kersanghe.
But still we have long way to go.
Okay?
But at least when we have that in my mind in our mind, in the beginning of the designing of any product, if you have that scope already in place, it's easy.
And okay, if you have already developed but you have not given a thought and what exactly we have to do to improve it, even that is also possible.
Okay, and again it is not one-stop solution, it is a continuous solution.
So every year, every data you update in your website that has to be validated you cannot just say that today I have validated it's 100% compliance and then you can say no.
So it has to be a continuous process, any new addition you do, you have to do it.
So we are addressing the spectrum, like as ma'am was explaining already, so I'll not go in deep.
So we have to address each and every person in the spectrum.
First, second thing is what we have understood why the digital accessibility is important.
Okay, there are three major criteria: that is, one is the ethical responsibility, that ensuring it is a fundamental right that information should be reachable to everyone.
Okay, so you cannot forego on that.
Okay, so that's your responsibility.
Second is legal complaints.
Now, internationally, there is a standard which indicates that you know, as per WCAG 2.1, there are other things also, but as per web content accessibility guidelines, you have to make sure that it has to be managed.
So nothing to do like as a
It is basically all standards are listed and whatever uh you know issues are there, how to tackle it, what is mandatory, it has been listed in each and every point.
Okay, so we have to just address that, make sure that it is being given on.
Only that thing we have to know.
Third is the business advantage.
When you say the spectrum, do you know what is the population of persons with disabilities in our country?
Actually, the population census happened in 2011 and 2025, the new thing has going to happen, like new population census.
But do you know what is the percentage?
Okay.
So it's basically seven percent.
But it is going to increase more and if we consider senior citizen and other kind of multiple disabilities, it is almost fifty percent of the population are going to be, in some way or the other, they are going to be called as disabled.
Okay?
So it's not a permanent one, but any kind of.
Say for example, the spectacles which you are wearing, and actually two months ago I was not wearing spectacles and now I started wearing it.
Okay, so it is basically again an assistive device.
It is helping you to see or read the text which is very smaller.
Okay.
So this is what happened with the person with disabilities, right?
So they need certain devices for them to improvise or to leverage their day-to-day activities.
Okay?
So so that what happens when you address that automatically as a business statistics also you are increasing your population.
Okay, and so more scope is there, people will be using.
And this search engine, we say it's very important that because, as you know, uh multiple websites is very complex.
Okay, I wanted to get into the website and need only one information.
And you will not believe when I uh tested most of the government websites, search engine for the namesake it is given, but it doesn't work.
These are the functional uh aspects you know which need to be corrected in the beginning but it is not happening.
Accessibility is the special non-functional requirement which comes at the end.
Okay?
But even the basic functional requirement is also not fulfilled in in most of the websites.
Just because now government has made it mandatory, now people are just running towards the accessibility, but leaving the even the functional requirement.
So this is the thing.
Okay, so we need to be more conscious, and at least now we can take some steps forward and then make sure that you know we fulfill the requirement.
So moving forward, yeah.
As you all know, what is WCAG?
It is Web Content Accessibility Guidelines and internationally recognized and technology neutral standard.
Okay, it is the basic, it's an important framework for designers, developers, testers, you name it, everybody who is involved in digital platform or digital world they are supposed to follow instructions, what is I mean the standards which is for given in WCHE.
Okay, and it aligns with global legal agreements.
So what India has done is that they have just taken the international guidelines but they prepared it in Gig W three point two and added few points also additionally but literally the handbook is actually the global standards which they are following.
Okay.
So the latest version mandates conformance with WCAG.
In that, what they have done is only the mandatory portion they have taken.
There are like you know, few things are recommendations are there, fewer best practices are there, but mandatory at least we should make it happening, right?
So that's the reason they have considered WCG 2.1 level AA.
They have exploited and it requires regular auditing to maintain those standards.
So it's none a one-time fix, but it's a continuous commitment.
Okay so when we issue a certificate it's going to be for one year only and it will be revived because we never know most of the say for example financial related websites uh there are a lot of documents, lot of updates happening.
Okay, so it can't be like you know constant.
So it has to be updated regularly.
So what we do is we generally list out whatever URLs we are testing and we'll issue the certificate as per the version and as per the date.
And we will say this validity is only till this day.
So that any uh as of now in India we don't have an authority to cross-check whatever audit is happening right now, eventually it will happen uh in future.
But uh to just to make sure that we are in a safer site we generally reveal this information.
Otherwise you know website people they can update any other information and they can consider that it's accessible.
So we need to be more conscious about all those things.
So how can we address accessibility in a holistic way?
What we are doing today is very much required that we are bringing the awareness.
At least your thought process is evolving.
I I'm not sure that most of of them them, some would have come across this already, but some are like you know, looking at this point of view in a new way.
Okay, so being an architect when I was working uh like specific to architectural aspects also.
Accessibility part, of course, we considered user, but we never thought of user with person with disabilities as one of the you know user spectrum.
So now it's high time that we uh high tech means it's a human right now.
So I'm also researching about uh metro stations and all those things to make them you know more accessible and all those things.
And in terms of emergency evacuation also.
So I'm talking uh out of the subject, but uh the idea is I'm saying how the evolution is happening.
So, similarly, even with the digital accessibility, the awareness is the first point, and then you know about the standards, then you try to incorporate whenever you start using or developing a tool and now your perspective changes totally right as an architect when I enter my room I look at the flooring I look at the wall I look at the panels and fall ceiling it automatically comes to my mind.
Okay, so this is what you're going to do after today's session.
When you go outside, uh, when you start looking at your own mobile phones and apps, okay, you will have a different perspective.
Can you tell me uh which is the best app which you are looking at or which you have used till now and then which you want to name it?
Anything which you have come across in day to day life?
You?
Anybody?
Any app which is more easy and user friendly.
Phone page.
What's up?
Yes.
Phone pay.
Swiggy.
Phone pay?
Anything else?
Okay.
So you would have come across, okay?
And the worst part, you know, in terms of website, everybody is having a bankhold.
Bank uh I mean everybody's a bank holder here, everybody is having an online transaction uh doing in a website.
So I'm not going to take uh ask uh which bank account you have.
Okay.
Just to uh make sure that have you got frustrated whenever you look into a bank website.
Yes.
Right?
Most of the time.
You all agree?
Almost 90% here in this uh forum.
So it's basically one is more complex.
Second, every website is totally different.
Okay, and what exactly you want to like a say for example the instant transaction you wanted to do.
Every time I get confused, which is the right route to get into it.
Okay, either you have to get into the beneficiary there, which is going to take more time, but I want you to just transfer instant money.
Google Pay is far better than the getting it to the website and then doing the online transaction.
Okay?
So yes, somebody was telling that even the able people, there's no word called able and disabled, but so called.
Uh they say even for the able people also the websites are not designed properly.
Okay.
So that means we have to do a lot of things, we have to understand many things.
So awareness and training that we are already doing, early integration of accessibility, other than clear accessibility guidelines you have to follow dedicated accessibility expertise within the team.
So now uh say for example there are people who have not attended this training session.
Okay?
You are far better than that people, right?
So you have that compatibility, like you know, compared to them, you are better known of the subject.
Uh, and actively seeking and using user feedback, which a ma'am was saying that involving or seeking people with disabilities also for their inputs.
Okay.
And accessible documentation.
So whatever you improve just to see before and after, like how effective it is.
Okay, this again yeah these are the foundation uh even the WCHE guidelines was uh structured considering these four basic principles okay so that is pore.
Surfaxal kai capitalism yade porago.
So you can remember por that is P perceivable, operable, understandable, and robust.
Okay.
So as a tester, what we do is we take the WCHG guidelines, all the lists we will do, and we'll make sure that each and every uh criteria which is met based on this core criteria also.
So for the user tester, we will ensure that with respect to core uh what is that perceivable?
There are three four criteria have been given.
I'll be showcasing an example also how the Excel sheet is made, and I'll showcase the difference between the user tester and the manual tester also.
Okay.
So these are the complete comprehensive list of guidelines.
First India follows EW that is guidelines for Indian Government website and it aligns with WCAG.
The question which was asked by that gentleman in the morning.
So it's basically Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.1 issued by W3C.
And we have Indian standard policy.
All these things, it's a comprehensive thing.
Uh what we do is simply just to uh you know avoid any kind of guidelines under the scope we list everything okay and we say that all the checklist has been comp uh compiled with all these guidelines, and if it is a financial related website, then we'll make sure that SEVI is also involved because SEVI also agree takes all these guidelines only.
Okay.
So yeah, this I already explained.
So now I will take you like how uh the as an auditor because see that's my uh core subject.
What I do is every day I do a testing.
So I have a team under me.
So we have uh like you know, automatic testers, we have manual testers, and we have user testers.
So, my role is to coordinate among all three of them.
We have a different uh checklist and the templates for each one of them, and we have different tools to evaluate each and every website and mobile apps.
Okay?
So it basically cross-checks each and every criteria from top to bottom to left to right, each and every URL, every page you are adding in your website okay so I will just uh showcase that example to you so these are the phases which we come across so first is that uh this two way applies one is that at the beginning of the website which you are designing, you can do it as a tester.
Also, you can involve us, or if the website is already done and before publishing it, you want to test it with us.
Then we have five phases basically.
The first phase is that confirming the scope, okay, and gathering all the information, and then we list it out, and then uh we will say which are the guidelines we are going to follow, okay.
Then we do the three level of testings.
So that what we are doing is that like uh somebody asked me, like we have uh complex websites which has you know uh different URLs, and it is manually manually it is impossible for you.
Say I have done 2000 test cases using an automation tool.
You consider that same 2000 test cases using manual testing.
It's going to be a helpless task.
Okay.
So automation tools are like a boon to us.
Like you know you can utilize it within say 2000 test cases, it took me almost 24 hours to run the tool.
If it is 50 test cases, then within half an hour it can run the tool.
So it depends, like you know, duration will be there.
But at least you have enough information.
Again, you see a person who is going to mitigate it is going to be again a big task.
Okay, so sometimes what we do is we take a sample URLs which is very uh you know predominantly used, uh it depends upon the client.
They will they can request us like which are the predominantly used samples or URLs where the public interface is more.
Okay, you list down everything.
Okay, and then first we will address it, and in that whatever severity is there, we will list it out and we'll ask the developer to mitigate that first and come back to us again.
Okay, so likewise, we can uh make it like you know depends upon the website, depends upon the complexity.
We can work out those models.
Okay, there are certain trade secrets which I cannot explain, but still, this is the overall picture to just showcase you how the auditor uh addresses the issue with a website.
Okay, so basically these are the five things, and third pieces that reporting and recommendation.
So, what we do is based on these three levels, and again all three cannot be happened in one go.
Okay, it is of no use.
So, first we do the automatic testing, we'll ask them to mitigate, uh, we'll ask the developer to mitigate it.
Once they come back, because there will be some uh you know changes happening in the website.
So you would have changed some color contrast, you would have done something.
Again, the second iteration will happen.
So to improvise it, okay, then we will go to the manual testing.
So it's like a cycle.
So first you do one level of testing, mitigate it, come back to us, see the improvement, and then go to the second level of testing.
Okay.
So this is basically uh just to understand as a tester what we do and how uh different cycles and for example automatic testing, say hundred percent compliance is there.
Okay, so in uh automatic testing, at least 30 percent of uh the issues can be uh detected easily.
Okay, basically, in automatic resin, some tools it depends upon how many violations it is considering, like errors.
Uh in our tool, which is a internationally
licensed tool, it it considers 21 rules basically.
So for every URL it just cross-checks.
Out of 21, how many violations are there?
So if it is only seven or three violations, it will convey and it will even detect which portion there is an error.
Which exactly say, for example, mostly header and footer are the main culprits.
Okay, and once if you mitigate it, more or less it is repetition.
Okay, so that is the main concern.
Then wherever you have graphics, most of the time all text is not given.
So again, that is also again one more issue.
Okay.
So we tested through automatic, so whether 30% mitigation happens and then the manual testing remaining 40% okay but you cannot always rely on the tools so somewhere the human interface is also required so that's the reason we go for the third level of testing, which is user testers.
Okay, so based on the compilation of all the report, and finally, we release that if it is more than 90%, then the certificate will be issued.
Okay.
So again, this is the explanation of the same thing which I explained you.
So here it is more into like what are the basic elements which in automatic testing it uh criteria it identifies.
It issues like missing alt text, poor keyboard navigation, insufficient color contrast, missing from labels or incorrect use of Area attributes.
Mostly this the automation tool will detect.
Okay and provide clear reports for the developers.
In terms of manual testers, uh basically the visual interface, say color contrast, links, buttons, okay, and all those things have been uh considered.
And with respect to user interface, it usually see how user friendly real web feedback like when they're uh giving providing a feedback form or something like that, how efficiently the websites are working, what are the different uh options it is providing for a person with visual impaired or the hearing impaired and all those things.
So uh and again we cannot just use browser.
Okay, so here what will happen is the testing will remain the same, but the thing is for different interfaces, again the cycle will you know has to continue.
So first is that we will do Windows here, Google, Chrome, or we'll use because everybody will have different devices.
So that same system need to apply for different uh you know, applications operating systems platform we check and target browsers also, and then we use core assistive technology devices.
The next person who will be addressing in the afternoon, he will actually uh give you a demonstration of all these tools also, what are the different types of tools?
So we use NVDA mostly, we use it and then voiceover magnifiers and zoom tools, speech recognition software to run the uh you know run into the website and check uh where are the violations happening.
So sometimes what happens screen detail may uh the main headings if you're not actually managing it properly.
This is like the code level I'm saying.
So it will not actually reach to the main heading, right?
So then the person who is actually interacting with the website they are not able to navigate it properly.
So it is important that every uh point be check in.
So these are the core dimensions of accessibility audit, like which I already explained.
So first is the navigation and the structure of the website, then the keyboard, like shortcut case, as Dr.
Abbaham, which she just explained you in the interview also.
For her the basic uh use is not mouse.
It's only the keyboard.
Again websites mostly they fail in providing the shortcut keys, it doesn't work.
Okay, so you can easily make these small, small increments, it should really help.
And color contrast again, most of the websites it fails.
And there is a ratio which is given.
Most of the time, uh, the inputs what I gather uh from the uh developer is that this color is actually you know uh our uh uh company scheme and all those things.
I'm not asking you to change the color at all.
I'm just telling you to retain the color ratio that is the background and the uh you know the text which is the yeah.
Uh just one question.
So when we are talking about accessibility uh so there is one thing that uh system settings need to be changed to you know make uh the system accessible.
For example, in iOS or Android, I can go and change the accessibility settings for colors, right?
So it gives me what sort of color blindness I want to uh modify the settings for, right?
So one is we are achieving the accessibility after modifying the settings.
The other is the system should by default be accessible, right?
So for example uh for color contrast, is the expectation that it should be by default accessible or fast uh once the settings are changed, then it should be accessible.
So you have those plugin models, right?
Not everybody needs the same thing, but you have those plugin models where according to the vision, uh low vision people, they can interchange it.
One could be in the website or one could be in the system also.
So my point is a lot of people who are uh you know not digitally literate or have low understanding of these you know that you can go and change in the settings.
Uh for them it is very difficult to understand that how to change that right.
Uh so shouldn't it be that the system should by default be accessible and we have that tool in the latest uh laptops, but not in the old devices.
Not everybody is holding a old device, right?
Right.
So our uh concern is that whatever website you develop, it should be compatible even with the old webs, old uh devices also, where these accessibility features are not available.
We were speaking with uh uh Amazon and uh who MS Office something, the company which uh actually developed this operating system.
They were saying we are having a feature which we didn't come across.
They don't actually advertise that.
Okay, so eventually we got to know that okay, it is there.
So uh it's better that you incorporate all the plugin models in the website only so that there is no uh relying uh factor with respect to your device or anything.
Okay.
How does the system know that when a person with a disability is coming onto the platform
See, one is that in belt criteria is there that the color contest already it should be uh you know, uh the colour contest need to be maintained as per the standards.
Second, these plugin models, so there is an accessibility symbol which is there, so they know like they have to operate there only.
So first they will interject because they are trained in that way, so they'll search it where it is located, they can the screen reader only to explain.
So there they can hit it and then they can actually maximize the screen and whatever they want it to do, they can do it.
So finally as per the all the testing, you know, uh this is the kind of report we generate.
So which explains like what is the URL we have tested and what is the criteria and which uh severity it falls.
Okay, and so this will be easy for them to understand where we are standing, and then finally, that will actually lead to a final result.
So, I'll take you to the example, like what question you have asked, I'll tell you like how the approach of different users when they are using the same website.
Okay, so this is an example which I can tell you.
Like, first, say a visual imped, like person with visual impairment is looking at a website.
So he'll open a website, so he will directly not use mouse, he will start the screen reader which is already installed.
Okay, NVDA is already installed.
The screen reader will start reading the page okay from top to bottom if the headings are hierarchically maintained.
Okay, then it will navigate via headings and links.
If there is uh text, like mostly if you see all the websites are very colourful with lot of graphics, considering only people uh with only visual uh you know people can see it, only the websites are made in that way.
But what about people who are visually impaired?
If there is no alt text, they can't read any photograph.
See, I have a friend Namruta.
So whenever I share a photo to her, I explain her that there are three women and there is a woman who next to you is Dr.
Anjali Yagarvar, like that.
So I brief it like this is the all text when you ever you upload any photograph you have to explain it.
Right?
So similar way that uh sim for all the images, all text is important, then improper heading structure.
So if you see there is an in-to-mark.
So when they test it, they will say these are the criteria which is missing.
Okay, so finally it says the content is not perceivable and WCEG is a failure.
And similarly, if you say mobility in payment, again they open the website, they use only keyboard, so they only test it with shortcut keys.
Okay, if you are failing again, then again focus some are you know focus elements which are missing, then keyboard trap and menu or form.
It cannot submit the form.
Okay, so again we are failing, so interface is not operable.
The third is the hearing and payment.
So they will look for any videos whether the sign interpreter is there or any captions are there.
So they will say it is failed.
Most of the thing, government websites, they link it to the YouTube.
And YouTube also it has a feature, but those YouTube are not at all actually you know connected with the captioning.
So though they say it is an external link.
So in that case, what we do is we pad report.
If they are not ready to change, we will say it is not under our scope because it's an external link.
So whatever we have cross-check only for that we give a compliance certificate.
So here in this case it is not perceivable.
So you see how we uh criteria is met perceivable in terms of operable, all those four main uh foundational uh you know uh guidelines we follow.
In terms of cognitive disabilities, if it is too complex, the layout paragraphs are long, confusing instructions.
I actually investigated with one of uh because I uh volunteered in a a special school also.
So I involved one person with uh intellectual disabilities above eighteen years, who has done graphic designing and all those things and whenever I uh asked him to assess a government website is totally confused.
He's not able to understand.
Okay, so it has to be more simplified way, and then the information needs to be conveyed.
So content is not understandable.
So likewise we do it, and then finally the overall uh list will be made in this way, visually impaired screen reader, whether it is failing uh based on perceivable or not, what is the outcome it is coming, where we are standing and what is the uh what we do is current status kya hai and suggested picks also we will say and as per standards whether it is meeting the uh criteria or not that also will be explained so uh just one question on this slide uh we are auditing for these four profiles.
I think these are the four broader profiles that we have.
Broader profiles for user testing specially, but and even WCAG is also targeting every criteria related to these four principles only.
So overall, if you see all this thing, it's a cycle.
So the iterations will happen 1.0, 2.0, maximum 3.0 we do, and then because we have to draw a line somewhere because mitigation generally what happens, you know, when I throw a ball to them, uh say 75 test cases, they'll come back only with 15 test cases mitigated.
And they say only this much is possible, design criteria, this, that, and all.
But we can't do that way.
We have to look into the website holistically, and hundred percent complaints need to be met if you want to really want it an accessibility certificate.
And it is possible.
Only thing is there is a mindset
there are certain drawbacks which they have like you know why we need to do this okay so that is there and generally the uh uh you know the mindset is like that, once we test it, the website is cleared.
It doesn't happen like that.
Developer has to mitigate.
We can only, as an auditor, explain that there are an error, error, and issues are there.
But finally, it is in the hands of the developer, how eventually you are going to make it more compatible.
So, okay, let me take you to the examples like how websites are similar to the mobile phones.
Uh, if even when you go through any applications, okay.
So there are key values uh what you could come across.
One is the poor color contrast and small fonts, lack of screen reader support and inability to use a keyboard or a switch control or a voice command and complex gestures and confusing navigation without alternatives and missing accessible labels.
In fact, in the afternoon session, I have a checklist also for the designer which you can actually uh you know use it whenever you design any uh application.
Uh so these are the uh you know basic key barriers which we come across and I can actually relay a small video of a person with visual equipment, who is Namrita.
She is operating an Amazon platform to uh you know book her book one of the product which is essential for her.
And then you will see how those applications are very well made for her to use it.
Okay.
So I can give you a run through on that.
And basically compared to website, the complexity of a mobile is that here the keyboard is totally like ma'am was saying, that it's all uh you know screen oriented, touch screen oriented.
Okay, so we don't have a keypad in this.
So one is the color contrast, which is again 4.5 to 1 ratio is not met, and touch target if you see the sizes are different, and then screen.
So if doing test while testing, also we make sure that it is compatible in all these aspects.
Okay, and simple gestures like how you swap it and and if the if the tab is very small and the finger cannot reach right so those things and if when you keep the orientation like the tab also if it is in different uh direction if it changes how does it work?
Audio visual feedback do not provide audio only feedback, always include a visual or a haptic alternator.
So I just demonstrate with the video.
Uh Shiz Namrita.
Uh volume is not coming, I think.
But it has jack is good.
Mm-hmm.
I'll tell you.
Audio into the attributes channel is screen.
So it is um
and here's the number of that personal technology and
rather assisted technology.
So I could just
repeat
it.
Can you
do that?
Design face.
Hello everyone.
I hope you're having a good day.
My name is Namrata Mehta, and I'm a master's in social work and working in the social development sector for the past 18 years.
Well I have visual impairment and I use technology and
rather assistive technology a lot for my work, for my personal use, and I'm going to talk to you about how I use this technology, how the accessibility features work for me, what are the challenges I face and how can it be made better?
So, uh first I am going to show you how I use e-commerce websites.
So if you can hear I go to Amazon.
Amazon.
Suppose I have to question buy
dials for my daughters, then I'm searching A M M E R R D R P P E E R R M S Search.
Here button then I searched
search for explore image, error, word, lines, contain of headings.
I have to move heading wise, so I opened level two, link, bam, first,
button, then I
pamperers
keep moving like this.
Selected size is medium.
Select the size.
See if you can hear it.
I can search a size here, then I keep moving and find the buy buttons.
HRM full D tank delivered to use July one at the card by now.
Ships.
So I can go to buy now.
Then and this how image and this is how I keep moving and then also go to the
cancel cancel get flat and hey hey who credit credit
one and cash cash cash number
like you have if you can hear you can hear everything all the icons which my fingers are touching.
So now if suppose it doesn't work, it doesn't read.
The screen reader reader doesn't know how to pronounce these things and the app is not compatible with the screen reader, I will not be able to reach the right option and will not be able to shop.
So I go here
now from here I can
I can go to my credit card option and start star pay and then
buy the things I need.
So in this one thing you notice one is that NPD is already there in our mobile phone, the screen reader is reading it.
Okay, and if every uh label doesn't have a unique label and it is not reaching to the right thing and if it is not even in the features also mentioned touching the every buttons and links, it should be uh navigating navigatable, right?
So all these things matters.
So then only eventually they can actually successfully do the process.
So the uh readout that's period is doing yes, hitting its alt text of each yeah component.
For the graphics, all text is there and screen reader if you have a thing like in the coder level also for each and every reason but it's so the labeling is important.
So we you have those uh child or parent and all those things, no those attributes and the hierarchy, everything need to be maintained.
It has to land where if it is a link or button, that attribute needs to be a link or button only.
So we have those criteria, we have a enormous like list.
I'll show you now as a manual tester how the same thing is tested.
She was essentially sliding and it was moving to next sections.
That is how it was working.
It is like a tab, right?
Tab on keyboard.
Something like tab on keyboard.
Yes, it is it is a mix of two devices basically.
One one is the asper the application they have that facility and the screen reader is actually reading out the text yeah which is there in that website or a tool.
So that because they hear it out and then they uh use it okay
excuse me i I'll showcase one example how do you set how do they set it up which one NVDA the NVDA or whatever NVDA is a tool you have to download it's for free.
You it is available in the website.
Basically, in your iPhone, this is already invented.
And nowadays all the phones almost have this accessibility tool.
Previously, only iPhones were supposed to have all these kind of features, and people with vision impairment were buying these iPhones because of this feature.
But now probably every very manufacturer is given this kind of research.
So I'm gonna explain how
and
so he is a manual tester that he can see but he is going to test whether NVDA is working properly or not.
So he has installed NVDA in his software and then I've given a checklist to uh you know cross-check the website is actually uh compatibility with screen reader.
So the as per this criteria is cross-checking, and I'll just run this.
Oh, I'm gonna explain how Nvidia testing criteria help for web accessibility testing.
These are the criteria that need to be tested tested so that one can say that website is accessible.
Let's move on with it.
So here is a criteria, focus on all buttons such as mobile menu.
Does the screen reader announce just a clear name like search instead of just a button?
So it works like the screen reader should announce it as a search button rather than just saying a button on a blue.
So let's move on with the credit credit info banner landmark navigation landmark logo.
Click a blindmar label accessibility option.
L stands against the manner landmark find rating slash company slash research and in blank search button.
Com
get your contact search button.
Contact us visit it.
Search button.
So you can hear it clearly say us it's a search button.
So the guy is a little bit
So the criteria passes.
Let's move on to the other criteria.
Is there a scrollable new sticker or not?
So it deposes based on the keys.
So by using only the keys you can be scrolled to the website or not without using a mouse.
So let's move on with it how the test works.
Credit coin for log locoal.
So to get missing image descriptions, open the context menu.
Unlabeled graphic visited same page link.
So here I'm clearly not using the walls, I'm just using my keyword.
By using keywords, let's test if it boxes.
By in the MVDA, by using tab key, you can move forward.
By using shift plus tab key, you can move backward.
Mind rating slash company slash research head blank search button.
Contact us visited link.
Get yourself rated visited link.
About us visited link.
Services same page link understanding ratings same page link media same page link understanding ratings same page services same page link about us visited link navigation landmark get contact us visited link search button so
here it works by using tap and chip plus tap we can move forward and backward so two in two infomerics pw6 dot
so the criteria passes sir then we note if the criteria pass or not based on criteria the test if we take we
so uh so this is how we do it okay where are these all right there coming?
So it's all from the guidelines.
What we have done is we have taken all the guidelines, we have uh uh divided uh with the automatic and all the things.
Whatever automatic question cannot cover, do we repeat the same guidelines even in the manual testing also.
And for user testing, I have created my own template because for them, giving the whole website assess that it is going to be a difficult task.
So, based on their criteria, water is essential.
So I listed down only those uh uh checklists and then I rewent to them.
Going one step back.
It's WC I'll show you.
It's in the government uh thats' like
and everyone follows the same and write their own is that so these are standards so you have to follow the same the point that you're reasoning the morning that if you just follow WCAG you might fall short of the word standard there for the Indian websites, right?
With the Indian standards.
That's why we are saying again and again just follow all of these standards.
Standards, not the guidelines.
Standards
So you have a uh detailed report here.
You need to just download those things and then it will give you all the title.
So uh essentially are we saying that there are certain uh audit audits that we can automate and there are certain audits which can't be automated, which have to be tested manually.
See, in automation, what happens we cannot totally rely on people?
It's basically how to speed up the process.
Okay.
And uh if say a manually also in those days manually only they are using the automation tools are not available.
But if say one month it takes to assess one website, okay, because the even writing the test cases also as a manual test set, they have to see which is the uh test cases.
Say, for example, simple remote.
Okay, if I use power button, TV should be on.
This is one test case.
Okay, and this is the functional requirement.
Instead of writing this first test case, I'm telling that you know after switching on the television, what and all should happen.
Okay, the main criteria if it is missing, then no uh it is no it is of no use that you are entering into the television and operating it.
So the power button should be on first.
So these are the test cases we write.
So those days they used to write it, but now in automation testing, it can run the tool and it can first of all it can collect all the URLs.
Second, based on these WCAG guidelines, it's already feed into it, number of rules and violations.
So it will cross-check from top to bottom and left to right, every URL it will cross-check, and it will even pop up the uh picture also, like where exactly the issue is happening.
Okay.
Right.
So this it will speed up and within a two hours time only it will give you a complete list.
But but the thing is the automation tool, whatever is generating is not easy for a developer to read.
So what I do is I take information from that and put it in an Excel, which is in the simplest way.
So I extract all the information, put it arrange it in other ways.
So as a team leader, this is what I do.
To convey the message in a simple way to a developer.
So then it is easy for them.
Every test case they will see the screenshot is next to them.
They will say okay, this criteria we have mitigated.
So this is the simplest way we do.
But you can do it, but the thing is totally you cannot rely.
Answer to your question, only 30% you can rely on it, but balance uh the 70% can be fulfilled only with the manual tester and the user test.
Then only the hundred percent compatibility we can achieve.
I I as I understand that validation part should be done some from some some person, in person.
Like but the auditing part can be automated because if it's uh set of rules which system can understand that I have to run these rules and like system can augment itself based on the person also that I'm basically auditing for this person.
It can audit but, obviously if I want to be certain I have to give it to a person who can then validate it, okay, this is accurate or not.
That that is my
checkpoint that you cannot totally rely on the automation tools.
It is really important that management because they these are IAP uh you know uh certified people, they know what is the like they're sensitive to the accessibility part and use it just as why because eventuallyally fin at the end of the day they are the one who can use it.
I will give an example.
I will give an for example in your website you have an image of Mango.
Right.
Right?
It's an image.
But all text tuned apple
to automated texting passing alt text.
But
Apple Bola, look at the image like email.
No no no
me and everybody
automation automatic testing is what he's right.
If you put a alt text, go any all text EID approaches
See, I can just vote for it.
AI cannot replace the human beings.
No, it will empower them.
It will empower human beings.
Let's just assume that there is no AI.
We are sitting 10 years.
No, no, DI is an AI, but AI is nothing.
Human beings are always a superior words.
But other mouthful stuff but
job anyway.
Right?
Okay.
But what we are saying it's uh it you have to understand this point, AI automatic tool koe bi hair cannot replace the manual testing and the user testing.
So the user testing comes at the end.
I mean you don't get a week back report.
Yeah, agreed.
And and so I said that uh the auditing part can be automated but validation has to happen uh from a person.
Validation meaning certain things cannot be tested by automatic.
Okay.
So
validation, we we don't use the word validation.
We use it final checkpoint.
You know, it's it's a it's a continuum of the assessment of the auditing.
It's just not the validation.
I can validate
10%, 5% nicer, you are good to go.
That's wrong.
But when I'm doing an assessment, then I say you are not 5% compliant.
I don't say you are 95% compliant.
I say you are not 5% compliant.
Right, right.
Uh just showcasing since you are so keen about uh knowing the automation tools, uh just a glimpse of it, you know how uh detail it takes place okay so for example this this some website home page if we take and then you know uh so before uh we even crossed it our own website and trying to see more compatibility.
So it says that out of 21 rules violation which is already fed in the uh system and it will uh check for each and every criteria.
So this is one particular URL if we go then it will showcase like what are the number of violations
happened, and then to showcase each and every criteria where exactly it is happening, and it actually shortlists whether it is a critical, serious, moderate, or minor.
So it categorizes the number of violations, uh, false under which category.
So eventually as a developer you have to look into first critical aspects first, then come to CPS and then model.
And there are certain uh probable issues are there and there are like you know best practice is also.
okay So in the website, in our own website, it cross-shapes and then it will highlight.
This is a very old report which we have generated already and which has been indicated.
So, likewise, this is one rule which is violating.
Ensure links have discreenable text.
Okay, if you get into inside, then it will showcase where exactly it is happening, and then there are two errors with respect to one violation.
Okay, and it will highlight also which area it is happening.
Now, if I cover this report to the developer, he can understand.
So, what I do is I put it in a simplest way in an Excel sheet.
I'll say these are the number of violations and these are the number of URLs that have obtained into this score, and for every test case, what exactly and how the WCAG references it all these things I have to do.
Of course I use AA also to you know list out all those things again manually if you want to check your guidelines and put it best you put it in chat GPT will tell you.
Okay.
These are like additional features which we take it in the day-to-day life video.
So simplifying the reports is also important so that you are finally at the end of the day you have to mitigate.
Okay, so coming to the last portion, I know it's lunchtime and then I wanted to just address with the sum up of all these points which I have addressed till now.
So the path to digital inclusion so digital accessibility is a fundamental for an inclusive online world.
So it benefits a wide spectrum of uses, which we have been addressing from the beginning.
Like now, the spectrum is very big, and understanding each and every requirement is very important.
And in the auditing process, I have explained you what are the layers of testing because why it is important I told you uh screening only using automation tools is not going to help.
So we need more and more efficient certified auditors and also user testers perspective, right?
So now we have just taken three or maximum four representatives, but 21 types of disabilities are there.
You know, reaching out to everyone is going to be a Hercules task, but still at least one baby step we have taken that at least representative taken from three uh people.
And then uh a team effort and early integration or a clear to success.
So, like all different phases as I told in the beginning of the website, or once you have completed the website about to publish, make sure that you validate it beforehand.
Or if it is already ongoing, take an effort, stop and see where you're standing.
Okay?
So it's a cycle and uh it's not a one-stop solution, it's a continuous process.
So prioritizing accessibility leads to better products and a more inclusive digital society.
As I told you, example like Namruta, like Abba, there are people who are totally rely on theing digital
world and you know after COVID what happened the whole world shuts down and then they were sitting at home and digital world is the only way where they can actually share their knowledge, gain information, all you know express their own self.
Okay?
So you are all going to play already playing a very important role.
It's only things in a responsible way, how you take forward and then considering accessibility as the main criteria and I'm sure with this training at least you know we can give you that leverage to think and then you know start your uh journey into this.
Thank you so much.
We will be connecting again in the afternoon session.
Uh Mr.
Guru, he is our developer, software accessibility trainer, and he will be addressing more of a technical and a designer perspective.
And then I will actually take over with the examples, live examples, what are the shortages and what's the checklist you have to follow?
With this I complete today's session and uh
if there are any questions, anything that is bumming you, we can remove the virus.
We we have fifteen minutes before lunch, so we can use this for discussion.
So your all your uh questions are very valid.
We are noting down and then we'll come back to you in case if we are not addressing today, but eventually we'll come back to you.
What is that very curious like in this whole session?
Like you must be having something in your back of the mind before coming or some expectations before attending this training.
Can I hear from you like what exactly?
Yes.
Okay.
Devil satellit.
Uh come back to the lift example you had given earlier.
That uh we 25 seconds you have uh is a standard that you set so that uh people with disabilities can access it.
Doing that again devil devils advocate uh would mean other people who do not have the disability would have to wait some extra time to for the lift to close, right?
And then people get frustrated.
People spam the button, right?
And that's a common issue.
So it's not like where we are not compromising on certain things to accordate for all these features, right?
Which is true right uh am i wrong in saying that
like I know you are actually sharing your honest opinion but ma'am will be the right person to answer your question, but please go ahead and complete your question.
So my point is that we are compromising uh in certain things.
We might be compromising in certain things to accommodate for certain things.
So then the question becomes: my question is uh how far is too far.
I know we have standards and maybe that's where it is, but uh you said there is uh one of the disabilities is uh mental disabilities right so then we have to simplify things uh on our uh UI so that uh anyone would be able to understand it right say maybe through icons we do but certain things would be too complicated and too simplified we might take a long might have a longer scroll or might have uh something else.
So my question is how far is too far or how do we set
I don't know.
Uh this is it really balance yeah balance.
You you're saying that is it really uh do we have solution, right?
Or uh
do we have solution?
Yes, that is happening.
Can I have the mic?
So I'll add to his point only.
There are su uh sometimes no people will people say that.
So which is in which is fine, which is fine.
Which is because as a as a lay man, as a non-disabled person, many family may go in a radical many days.
Yes, you want to say something?
Somebody else.
Nine.
There's a term point non-negotiable.
Right?
So what you are saying is there's a lift which is tuned for twenty five seconds and somebody on the other floor is just pitching chat the chat yeah.
I am incredibly important and say they are parame.
Right?
Quote unquote.
When we say non negotiable, that means for anyone, any class, any creed, any religion, any age, any kind of a gender identity.
It is non-negotiable.
So the law of the land says when we are coming to people with disabilities, the RBD Act says non-discrimination.
So within the disability types, if I talk about Sir, he's got a 45% disability, I've got 89% disability.
Right?
And they could be people more disabled than me, more severely disabled than me, 95%, 99%, 100%.
We get disability certificates 100% also.
So when I say non-negotiable, I'm talking for the 100% disability person who would be using your digital platform and yet he will be performing the best.
Correct?
Did I answer your question?
The question is that how do we attain to a kind of a successful representation for everyone so that nobody gets dissatisfied?
The law says the dissatisfaction or being impatient is not my thumb rule.
My thumb rule is that you cannot discriminate.
So if he uses it and if he is impatient, it's his individual identity and his behavior.
I cannot compensate on that.
I will not negotiate on non-discrimination.
But my me reducing the time could improve his experience.
It's okay uh you could in you uh reducing the time can uh make me left out of the whole business.
And my my my point is that I need to be partly or partially or fully participating in what you have developed.
Can I have that kind of interface that says you are only 40% compatible and he is 100% compatible?
The law says you have to make both of us 100% compatible.
If it's impatient, let it only be.
I don't care.
I feel you should be cognizant of the fact that a lot of spaces are shared by other people too.
So it may be somebody is disabled, and in your case, at least there's a little button uh which uh through which you can close the lift earlier right so if you have nobody who's coming in that's disabled then you can use the button.
However my bigger concern is that while our governing bodies are very quick to impose these kind of uh compliance They are not very quick, they are very late to impose, I'm sorry to say that.
It's been thirty-six years.
Yeah.
However, I see there's a lot of boxes in this case where uh I've had my grandmother who was partially dry fall and rake a hip because of the condition of the footpath.
I had broken my leg so for three months I couldn't walk and uh the biggest problem I faced was when I had gone on the footpath pretty horribly and there are there are a lot of issues like that.
So I just think it's very hypocritical for the government to impose these kinds of things whereas they're supposed to be leading with example is what I like to say.
Yeah, and there's also d demand and supply chain You need to understand the demand, right?
When I say forty eight crore people are not able to use our interface, you say oh it's a minority because there are hundred and forty crore people in the country, hundred and forty eight crore to be precise, you know, today's population.
But does that forty-eight crore matter to you?
Are you to get uh a lot of people who are digitally illiterate, alleged people with sixty percent disabled, 40% aging and many others.
So if you look at the entire population, only five to seven percent people are able to use quickly like what we are saying, person who is inpatient sitting next to me.
Does it matter?
Yes, it does.
I think everybody should be duly respected.
Yes, yes,
where they come from how they are, how about their facial or natural conditions?
I'm not able to hold this mind.
This is very heavy.
Just hold on it.
This is very heavy, right?
So the demand that I put up before starting this workshop, which I usually do every year, like I said 35,000, more than that uh I've done the training workshops.
Every time I just literally I put a collar mic, collar mic, collar mic.
Right?
What is it?
It's a demand.
And when I started way back in 1991, the first workshop that I had, I didn't have a collar bike, but that time I had strength in my arms.
So we have
to heavy micasakes.
So we are starting demanding.
And this is just an assistive technology.
What is a screen reading software?
What is JOWS?
What is NPDA?
These are all assistive technology.
There's a demand from the ground, and people have to provide it.
If you don't then you miss out on a customer.
As simple as that.
And every customer counts.
Because I'll just give you an example.
Which one is the best airlines without putting a political hype to it?
Concept G airlines.
The cheapest one.
Right.
You are right.
As as a Zenzi, I would have expected it a
I hope you have traveled within the book.
Every other airline had got a step ladder.
This uh stroller suitcase display means prefer karoe.
Hard step
prefer karu, and preferred it
station moving from platform to platform.
Think about a platform driver station, yes.
So it's about the ease of mind.
Everybody said user friendly ease, equality, compatibility.
But
the mark
is
Right?
Is it true?
Have a sync between the dilena dhima.
Two D's.
It will help you.
Did I answer your question?
No.
I have doubts, and that will always be, but that's okay.
That's okay.
Okay.
Alright, we will clear all those doubts by the end.
Any other question?
I think uh it's about uh the mindset change because uh I heard it uh from somebody that uh currently to be compliant uh with the regulatories.
Uh most of the companies are solving for you know the compliance background.
They want to be compliant so that the business can continue as usual.
Right.
So it's still not about the
empathy.
Yeah, it's a checkpoint.
It's still not about the empathy, but rather to be compliant.
So that business can continue to be as
See uh somewhere it has to start.
So journey of thousand miles because with a single step.
Like that Denda, that that you know that law tell you again
because Urmana Ya Gosa
What does it mean?
After pressure then, right?
It's a dendra outlook.
But eventually after 10 years, this render will become your basic need.
It it exists.
It tells you up karna here if you give board accessible, not retrofitting and fixing at the end.
It costs so much of money.
Depending upon a my to you know a complex website for fixing it, getting this automation done and you know the user centering done and everything done.
Hit the best web.
It ranges ranges for 85, 900,00 to 2 lakhs to 5 lakhs rupees.
Or herself.
This gentleman who was asking herself can say yes, herself can
website.
You know what?
If you go to the Facebook and you see the AI tools tells 90 seconds, but even if you go to a commercial you know website developer, he charges you 4500 rupees.
Or Rusko fixed and 80,000 area.
What nonsense.
So it has to be born accessible rather than retrofitting and fixing it up later.
So what we are trying to tell you is you have to remember all these tools.
What I discussed or what Radhika discussed and rules will come with little more technical details.
Case ni hobby, creative actions ni hob
Is it clear?
Yeah.
Alright.
I have a beautiful comic which is not yet
out in the public, but you know I just thought uh it doesn't relate directly to what you say, but uh rather than if you can just plug in this.
Distance coming.
Maybe not just leave it like that.
It's a manual thing.
Interestingly that it's not
Actually, no worries.
I'm just showing uh
Okay, by the time this comes up and this is a technical pitch, so any other thing, reflections?
Anything that's bugging you again?
You're still not saying in sync with me that you have to decide for people with disabilities, yes or no?
I can hear only the ladies saying yes, the gents are still
Oh I see that hand, yes, the the tallest one, yes.
But others?
Yes or no?
Yes.
Better.
Sari Chalabu.
Yeah, so this particular yes.
Can somebody read up from me?
I can't see it from me.
I'm too small.
Yes, somebody?
Oh my god.
Oh my god I can't find a single parking.
Disabled people are the luckiest.
So upon a turbulent khaki.
Oh my god.
I can't find a single parking
disabled So
or exile may ikam honewala if you don't design it accessible.
So people with disabilities are not the one who are at the
it's the other way around.
The people the most able, ableist, ableism.
This is what it's all about.
We are fighting for a parking which is accessible for ourselves, right?
We are fighting for a site which is accessible to us.
We are fighting for an app that we can look at, work upon, buy stuff.
But there might be you tomorrow in our shoe and we are saying, oh my god, Yahoo.
So the flip side of it is it's always a demand and supply.
We have come a long way till now asking for our rights.
It might be you tomorrow sitting in our position saying what about my right?
Correct, and the SDG says what
the most neglected population, the most vulnerable population has to come first
to make the right reason.
Correct?
So these are just example I'm just showing it to you.
It's not yet out.
We are about working on it.
There will be one series coming on digital accessibility also this right now on physical accessibility, but point you though what the age of Sarney Apnifu
Anish.
Anish Anish Anish.
So you were still you know contemplating on cash at this
Not that sense.
I'm just thinking of what balance means.
Subkari.
Understood.
Yeah.
So balance is subkari.
Don't wait for a tanda to come.
Don't wait for the law to say Adiyab compliance nayo.
You have to do it.
By book or by book.
Right?
Okay?
Anyone else?
Yes, I'm a Jana.
Translate work.
Mind me plugin Wa.
Alright.
So uh I think the the lunch is coming because I've sent the link to my colleague who is waiting in Delhi.
So he will hook up at two o'clock shop.
So I would suggest if you need a loom break, a bio break, yes sir.
Uh just one question I was thinking.
So uh we do have our testing framework in the company.
Like we do test every department before it goes live.
Uh but it's uh there is not a accessibility framework sitting around that, right since we are doing it now.
Uh I want you to understand since our target customers are mostly from tier two or tier three cities, uh how should we find
disabilities
If we are we are doing a deployment or major value
and ensure that uh this our product is accessible and time.
Right.
So what do you mean by tier two, tier three city?
Just give me an example of the city.
Yeah, so for example tier two would be gulaboo and tier three would be uh some uh uh what would I say tier example of Tier 3 would be some place inside Satara or Sandy.
Understood.
Right.
How is the testing done?
Online offline?
So we do have a team who does the testing.
We do have testers.
They have certain test cases.
They conduct the testing against them and they say whether the test cases pass or fail.
Similarly, we would have a test cases for accessibility also for the four different four broad profiles that we just saw.
They would then run those test cases
in their testing, and testing would be of different fact, right?
Some somebody would be doing detesting by a screen reader.
Sir my question is offline, online.
It's online.
Yeah.
So even if I'm anywhere in the world, a user with disability can connect to your website anywhere in the world.
Right.
Right in the person do not have to be kolapura satara or sambi.
So my question was I how do I find people in those locations?
Because I want my target this target tester.
Let me look at this.
So target tester to be sitting or from that location who can understand the context.
Okay, if I'm from this location, I might have certain limitations in understanding the technology also, right?
So I want to Sir no, no, no.
I just want to again come back to what I'm saying.
The testings are done online because it's a online platform.
A digital platform has to be done online.
It is irrespective of the fact where the location is.
If you even if I'm sitting in Australia or Canada, I'm a person with disability and I'm into a auditing of a site which is from Samli or from
uh you said Thani or Nasik or anywhere.
Doesn't matter.
A person with disability like numbrata was we're showing Amazon.
Amazon from where it came we all know.
But Amazon India, I don't know who's running it as a name I put in pata.
But as a user, if I'm testing it and she puts it together, then these are the packs which are accessible, these are not.
And sends your report.
It is all
my my point was that uh there are like in uh uh I have a customer who's from Tier 1, Tier 2, Tier 3, CD.
All of them will have a different behavior, right?
In how they use my app or how they use access my website, right?
Uh I might give them several options to make their life easier or to make the exploration easier, but not everybody can explore that because they have certain limitations with technology as well, right?
So I thought I was coming from that point of view that even if I make my product accessible, rightight.
Different sections of the society will have people who have different behavior, right?
So they might not all be uh aligned that how to access those tools which are meant to uh provide accessibility like uh I told you non negotiables.
So when I say non negotiables, for example just give me uh an idea and understanding, you have twenty criteria which are non-negotiable, right?
And diverse users who is even the you know from a tier one, tier two, even I say rural area, rural India, right, or semi-urban India, wherever.
Out of this 20 uh non-negotiables, if they are not able to use it, then we are paying.
But out of the 50, if the 20 are non-negotiables and you pass, that is what we are coming to.
We might increase the number of the non-negotiables once again depending upon the user.
Even if one user says, I'm having difficulty in this.
This particular accessibility criteria that you have created is not accessible for me.
So we need to revamp our accessibility standards.
See Kahao's doctor by here.
Which one is the one which we have not fixed here?
So it's a dynamic process.
The standardization is never a static process.
We do not end it here.
I might be the person who is 100% disabled, illiterate, coming from our background where I don't know how to use the technology.
So I am the person, the last user on the earth for whom you have to design.
Maybe I am not raised my voice, maybe I have not empowered, maybe I have not given that into that standard.
But once I reflect upon it and if you have come to know about it, there is the key to fix it up.
Right?
So what I am trying to tell you, I got your point, a person with disability in problem tier 2, tier 3 city, and yet not been able to access the most accessible formats, the tools that you have provided, still he is left behind.
So that particular even it is 0.0001%, we need to look at it and that is how we design the standards.
Just to give you understanding,
I'm a member of Niti IO where we make the policies, right?
When we make the policies, what we do is we also take users' feedback to understand how we are bridging the gap.
So in that course of bridging the gap if somebody says that implementation is not happening because my requirement is not taken care of.
So we put that into the standard and then bridge the gap with the policy so that the implementation and action can happen at the end of the day.
So I would specifically tell you if people like you come across something which you think is not been taken care of, this is a request to everybody.
Please come back to us.
We'll be happy to live that guy.
And there are very few people who can provide that kind of understanding.
No and just problem can be adjusted by adjusting problem how we do for the yeah physical uh accessibility also.
So you have to really orient them in such a way how to use your tool.
So it's an again additional value you have to add in.
You cannot blindly make them to understand your uh tool, you know.
Maybe awareness program need to be there, you have to leverage them with more and more uh I I agree.
But where I was coming from is uh I first need to understand what are the challenges that we are facing, right?
If I don't understand that how would I solve for it, right?
Right, that's what precise We are saying they are
cheap.
Go to the core of it.
What is it that is hampering them and what is that they are not able to use?
And we need to address it there.
We need to tweak our standards, address that sen thisse is a of dynamic.
It's never a static thing.
Right.
The standard for accessibility, whether it is uh civil environment, physical environment, digital environment, it's been starting for the last 20 years, maybe more.
So it is an ongoing process.
Okay?
Are you there for lunch now?
And then um can be back at all?
Two o'clock sharp.
Thirty minutes as a sign?